On November 4th, 2025, Zora Mamdani was
elected mayor of New York City.
His campaign, along with his opponents,
was built on trying to have the most
convincing story for how to make the
city more affordable. That working
people deserve a dignified life. At the
center of it all was [music] housing.
THAT HOUSING IS FAR TOO EXPENSIVE. WE'RE
GOING TO BUILD HUNDREDS OF THOUSANDS OF
AFFORDABLE HOMES, TAKE ON BAD LANDLORDS,
and freeze the
But unfortunately, he won't make it more
affordable.
It will take decades to reverse the
artificial scarcity of not enough
affordable housing.
From 1800 to 1900, New York City grew
from a town of 60,000 people to one of
the largest in the world.
But until the late 1860s, most New
Yorkers lived in Lower Manhattan.
The buildings grew, but not a lot.
Then it started to get crowded.
Entire families lived in tenement
apartments, barely larger than a modern
studio apartment.
Concerns about health and fire safety
led to laws that required windows and
courtyards.
But then something changed. Elevators
and steel enabled buildings to grow
taller.
Lower Manhattan expanded vertically.
But the taller the building, the larger
the shadow.
Light and air was no longer just a
concern for people living [music] in the
building. It was also a concern for
their neighbors.
>> [music]
>> High-end retailers demanded stricter
zoning in response to the spread of
multi-story factory lofts [music]
towards 5th Avenue.
In response came New York's 1916 zoning
resolution.
Buildings had to step back above a
certain height.
Then they looked away from the shadows
and saw heavy industry exhaust spewing
out next to residential homes.
And they were like,
>> [music]
>> maybe we should do something about that,
too.
But the 1916 zoning was still very
generous when it came to building.
>> [music]
>> New York had enough space for millions
of people,
but not for long.
place All of New York's recent mayors
have attempted to tackle the city's
housing crisis.
Blasio has a $41 billion plan [music] to
preserve or Mayor Adams took his plan
for what he calls the city of yes. One
of the biggest efforts took place under
Eric Adams,
a zoning reform estimated [music] to
create 82,000 homes over 15 years.
It's a series of incremental policy
changes. [music]
Houses can have an accessory dwelling
unit or an apartment inside the house.
>> [music]
>> Low-density apartment zones can add a
couple floors.
Neighborhoods of tall buildings can be
slightly taller. Some industrial [music]
districts were rezoned for housing and
businesses.
But this is not what a real housing boom
looks like.
In the 1920s, 729,000
homes were built in New York City.
A rate of home building that makes us
look utterly pathetic today.
The 1916 zoning was generous.
Although it required tall buildings to
step back, depending on the street width
and zone, a building could go up 5 to 20
floors before stepping [music] back.
And after stepping back to the central
quarter of the site, it could still be
of unlimited height.
A lot of the most beautiful buildings
around Central Park were built from this
era.
>> [music]
>> But then they were made illegal.
One of the most important ways to
measure the density of buildings is the
floor area ratio.
The total area inside a building divided
by the area of the lot it sits on.
A one-story building that covers the
whole lot has a floor area ratio of one.
A two-story building that covers half
the lot also has a floor area ratio of
one.
New York City's northern suburbs have
some of the most stringent zoning in the
United States.
Individual homes on single-acre lots.
But unfortunately, this hasn't just been
limited to suburbs.
Today, New York City also strictly
limits the floor area ratio of
buildings,
while its 1916 code did not.
The Empire State Building has a floor
area ratio of 31.
The floor space inside the building is
31 times the area of the lot it sits on.
Today, a new building next door in the
same zone would only be allowed a floor
area ratio of 15.
40% of buildings in Manhattan today are
too tall or too big to be built today.
By the 1910s and the 1920s building
booms, these changes weren't
incremental.
Row houses were replaced by large
apartment blocks.
>> [music]
>> Larger buildings were replaced by
skyscrapers.
As subways extended into Queens,
Brooklyn, and the Bronx, open fields
turned into dense neighborhoods.
New York's population grew, and as
incomes went up, living standards
improved [music] as families moved out
of tenement rooms into their own
apartments.
Today, however, without enough new
housing, rising wealth leads to small
apartments being merged into bigger
ones, with poor people being priced out.
This isn't an easy fix.
So to show these guys how it's done,
I've decided to start my own party, the
Henry George Was Right Party.
And unlike Cuomo, everyone knows that
the first step to a successful political
campaign is a well-designed website.
That's where Odoo comes in.
It's an all-in-one business management
platform offering more than 45 apps.
And with their website building
application, we can easily create a
custom site.
We quickly define the type of site and
our industry goals,
pick a color palette or insert our logo,
add a few pages and features, and choose
one of the available themes.
Then AI generates a customizable website
structure where you can simply drag and
drop our George's propaganda.
The first app is free for life with
unlimited hosting, and you can get a
free custom domain name for 1 year.
Use the link www.odoo.com/r/hoog-3.
By the 1950s, New York's Planning
Commission felt that it was time to
change the city's zoning.
At the top of the list of concerns was
congestion,
and not far behind it, the issue of not
enough parking.
The commission felt that 40 years of
piecemeal changes had made the zoning
code unwieldy and irrational.
They also wanted to protect industrial
jobs, but also residents from pollution.
The 1916 zoning did not have an
exclusively industrial zone.
>> [music]
>> Instead, heavy industry was limited to
operating in unrestricted zones that
also allowed offices, retail stores, and
housing.
With post-World War factories shifting
from multi-story to single-story layouts
and becoming more automated, more
industrial land was needed.
>> [music]
>> So in 1956, New York's Planning
Commission hired the architectural firm
Voorhees, Walker, Smith, and Smith to
prepare a new zoning system.
Then New York City changed forever.
Because in addition to increasing
parking requirements and creating
understandably separated heavy industry
zones,
>> [music]
>> the 1961 zoning code also introduced a
new type of restriction,
floor area ratio limits.
The single biggest factor behind the
decrease in zone capacity for new
buildings in New York City.
At first, this wasn't a problem.
From the 1960s to the 1980s, people and
jobs moved out to the suburbs.
It didn't matter if the shoe couldn't
fit.
New York's population shrank.
But as the city started to grow again in
the 1990s, attempts to build new houses
bumped up against the zoning limits,
leading to a housing shortage and rising
rents.
Getting rid of heavy industry out of a
dense city is understandable,
but restricting the FAR is
objectionable.
Today, the city is left with the relics
of unrestricted floor area ratio
Manhattan,
>> [music]
>> simultaneously some of the most
beautiful buildings in the entire city,
with the supply artificially constrained
in the other boroughs where people are
pressed for rent and space.
In 2025, an economist estimated that if
the floor area ratio limits were
removed, the floor space in New York
could increase by 71%
and the rent could go down by 18%.
Rather than just a tight squeeze on one
island, a more cohesive spread across
all five boroughs, and a reduced
pressure on Manhattan.
But attempts to go back are hard. For
years, it was made impossible.
In the 20th century, the city charter
was changed.
New York City gained a New York City
Council with 51 city council members,
each representing one of the city's 51
council districts.
And they gained power over land use
decisions.
If one council member opposes a proposed
rezoning in their district, like against
changing the FAR limits, the others will
defer to their opinion and also vote no,
regardless of what their own opinion
might be.
It's a wicked problem.
There's a very large competition to take
part of the land. Upzoning across all
districts would be an overall net
positive for housing affordability.
That land, however, has been split.
Rather than being able to blanket remove
these constraints, each of those parcels
have landowners who have vested
interests in not reducing building
constraints.
The ability for those parcels to vote
and blanket reject any upzoning in order
to protect scarcity is member deference.
[music]
The final responsibility a member has is
the land use process, a process that was
meant to ensure the substantial projects
built in our communities are shaped by
the members of their communities.
That is why member deference is such
cru- such a crucial principle.
Fortunately, Eric Adams, [music] through
a charter revision commission, was able
to put measures on the ballot that would
prevent this dynamic and allow for
fast-tracking new construction. These
are some of the most important changes
[music] to New York housing policy for
decades.
That's where the real power for housing
affordability lies.
A man can only dream of 1916 zoning
minus the heavy industry [music]
and an LVT plus congestion pricing
system providing the majority of New
York City's tax base,
which fund transit projects that spread
out [music] density to other boroughs.
But unfortunately, none of this will
ever happen.
However, one can get a similar benefit
by keeping property taxes
>> [music]
>> and exempting the value of new buildings
from it.
In fact, that's exactly what New York
City did [music] in the 1920s.
Al Smith signed a law that exempted new
housing construction from property
taxes.
At first, across-the-scale zoning and
tax changes will feel incremental and
not fast enough.
This is an unfortunate byproduct of
years of restricted supply.
Rome wasn't built in a day, especially
when it was illegal to build half of
Rome.
Mamdani, fortunately, now has the proper
tools to fast-track new development, but
it will still take decades to reverse
the damage.